Overview The insurance industry safeguards the assets of its policyholders by transferring risk from an individual or business to an insurance company. Insurance companies act as financial intermediaries in that they invest the premiums they collect for providing this service. Insurance company size is usually measured by net premiums written, that is, premium revenues less amounts paid for reinsurance. There are three main insurance sectors: property/casualty, life/health and health insurance. Property/casualty (P/C) consists mainly of auto, home and commercial insurance. Life/health (L/H) consists mainly of life insurance and annuity products. Health insurance is offered by private health insurance companies and some L/H and P/C insurers, as well as by government programs such as Medicare. 

Regulation All types of insurance are regulated by the states, with each state having its own set of statutes and rules. State insurance departments oversee insurer solvency, market conduct and, to a greater or lesser degree, review and rule on requests for rate increases for coverage. The National Association of Insurance Commissioners develops model rules and regulations for the industry, many of which must be approved by state legislatures. The McCarran-Ferguson Act, passed by Congress in 1945, refers to continued state regulation of the insurance industry as being in the public interest. Under the 1999 Gramm-Leach-Bliley Financial Services Modernization Act, insurance activities—whether conducted by banks, broker-dealers or insurers—are regulated by the states. However, there have been, and continue to be, challenges to state regulation from some segments of the federal government as well as from some financial services firms 

Accounting Insurers are required to use statutory accounting principles (SAP) when filing annual financial reports with state regulators and the Internal Revenue Service. SAP, which evolved to enhance the industry’s financial stability, is more conservative than the generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), established by the independent Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB). The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) requires publicly owned companies to report their financial results using GAAP rules. Insurers outside the United States use standards that differ from SAP and GAAP. As global markets developed, the need for more uniform accounting standards became clear. In 2001 the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), an independent international accounting standards setting organization, began work on a set of standards, called International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) that it hopes will be used around the world.  

Since 2001 over 100 countries have required or permitted the use of IFRS. In 2007 the SEC voted to stop requiring non-U.S. companies that use IFRS to re-issue their financial reports for U.S. investors using GAAP. In 2008 the National Association of Insurance Commissioners began to explore ways to move from statutory accounting principles to IFRS. Also in 2008, the FASB and IASB undertook a joint project to develop a common and improved framework for financial reporting. 

Distribution Property/casualty and life insurance policies were once sold almost exclusively by agents—either by captive agents, representing one insurance company, or by independent agents, representing several companies. Insurance companies selling through captive agents and/or by mail, telephone or via the Internet are called “direct writers.” However, the distinctions between direct writers and independent agency companies have been blurring since the 1990s, when insurers began to use multiple channels to reach potential customers. In addition, in the 1980s banks began to explore the possibility of selling insurance through independent agents, usually buying agencies for that purpose. Other distribution channels include sales through professional organizations and through workplaces. 

Auto Insurance Basics Auto insurance protects against financial loss in the event of an accident. It is a contract between the policyholder and the insurance company. The policyholder agrees to pay the premium and the insurance company agrees to pay losses as defined in the policy. Auto insurance provides property, liability and medical coverage: § Property coverage pays for damage to, or theft of, the car. § Liability coverage pays for the policyholder’s legal responsibility to others for bodily injury or property damage. § Medical coverage pays for the cost of treating injuries, rehabilitation and sometimes lost wages and funeral expenses. Most states require drivers to have auto liability insurance before they can legally drive a car. (Liability insurance pays the other driver’s medical, car repair and other costs when the policyholder is at fault in an auto accident.) All states have laws that set the minimum amounts of insurance or other financial security drivers have to pay for the harm caused by their negligence behind the wheel if an accident occurs. Most auto policies are for six months to a year. A basic auto insurance policy is comprised of six different kinds of coverage, each of which is priced separately (see below). 

Bodily Injury Liability This coverage applies to injuries that the policyholder and family members listed on the policy cause to someone else. These individuals are also covered when driving other peoples’ cars with permission. As motorists in serious accidents may be sued for large amounts, drivers can opt to buy more than the staterequired minimum to protect personal assets such as homes and savings. 

2. Medical Payments or Personal Injury Protection (PIP) This coverage pays for the treatment of injuries to the driver and passengers of the policyholder’s car. At its broadest, PIP can cover medical payments, lost wages and the cost of replacing services normally performed by someone injured in an auto accident. It may also cover funeral costs 

Property Damage Liability This coverage pays for damage policyholders (or someone driving the car with their permission) may cause to someone else’s property. Usually, this means damage to someone else’s car, but it also includes damage to lamp posts, telephone poles, fences, buildings or other structures hit in an accident. 

4. Collision This coverage pays for damage to the policyholder’s car resulting from a collision with another car, an object or as a result of flipping over. It also covers damage caused by potholes. Collision coverage is generally sold with a deductible of $250 to $1,000—the higher the deductible, the lower the premium. Even if policyholders are at fault for an accident, collision coverage will reimburse them for the costs of repairing the car, minus the deductible. If the policyholder is not at fault, the insurance company may try to recover the amount it paid from the other driver’s insurance company, a process known as subrogation. If the company is successful, policyholders will also be reimbursed for the deductible. 

  Comprehensive This coverage reimburses for loss due to theft or damage caused by something other than a collision with another car or object, such as fire, falling objects, missiles, explosions, earthquakes, windstorms, hail, flood, vandalism and riots, or contact with animals such as birds or deer. Comprehensive insurance is usually sold with a $100 to $300 deductible, though policyholders may opt for a higher deductible as a way of lowering their premium. Comprehensive insurance may also reimburse the policyholder if a windshield is cracked or shattered. Some companies offer separate glass coverage with or without a deductible. States do not require the purchase of collision or comprehensive coverage, but lenders may insist borrowers carry it until a car loan is paid off. It may also be a requirement of some dealerships if a car is leased. 

Uninsured and Underinsured Motorist Coverage Uninsured motorist coverage will reimburse the policyholder, a member of the family or a designated driver if one of them is hit by an uninsured or a hit-andrun driver. Underinsured motorist coverage comes into play when an at-fault driver has insufficient insurance to pay for the other driver’s total loss. This coverage will also protect a policyholder who is hit while a pedestrian. 

Homeowners Insurance Basics Homeowners insurance provides financial protection against disasters. It is a package policy, which means that it covers both damage to property and liability, or legal responsibility, for any injuries and property damage policyholders or their families cause to other people. This includes damage caused by household pets. Damage caused by most disasters is covered but there are exceptions. Standard homeowners policies do not cover flooding, earthquakes or poor maintenance. Flood coverage, however, is available in the form of a separate policy both from the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and from a few private insurers. Earthquake coverage is available either in the form of an endorsement or as a separate policy. Most maintenance-related problems are the homeowners’ responsibility. A standard homeowners insurance policy includes four essential types of coverage. They include: 1. Coverage for the Structure of the Home This part of a policy pays to repair or rebuild a home if it is damaged or destroyed by fire, hurricane, hail, lightning or other disaster listed in the policy. It will not pay for damage caused by a flood, earthquake or routine wear and tear. Most standard policies also cover structures that are not attached to a house such as a garage, tool shed or gazebo. Generally, these structures are covered for about 10 percent of the total amount of insurance on the structure of the home. 

2. Coverage for Personal Belongings Furniture, clothes, sports equipment and other personal items are covered if they are stolen or destroyed by fire, hurricane or other insured disaster. Most companies provide coverage for 50 to 70 percent of the amount of insurance on the structure of a home. This part of the policy includes off-premises coverage. This means that belongings are covered anywhere in the world, unless the policyholder has decided against off-premises coverage. Expensive items like jewelry, furs and silverware are covered, but there are usually dollar limits if they are stolen. To insure these items to their full value, individuals can purchase a special personal property endorsement or floater and insure the item for its appraised value. Trees, plants and shrubs are also covered under standard homeowners insurance—generally up to about $500 per item. Perils covered are theft, fire, lightning, explosion, vandalism, riot and even falling aircraft. They are not covered for damage by wind or diseas 

3. Liability Protection Liability coverage protects against the cost of lawsuits for bodily injury or property damage that policyholders or family members cause to other people. It also pays for damage caused by pets. The liability portion of the policy pays for both the cost of defending the policyholder in court and any court awards—up to the limit of the policy. Coverage is not just in the home but extends to anywhere in the world. Liability limits generally start at about $100,000. However, experts recommend that homeowners purchase at least $300,000 worth of protection. An umbrella or excess liability policy, which provides broader coverage, including claims for libel and slander, as well as higher liability limits, can be added to the policy. Generally, umbrella policies cost between $200 to $350 for $1 million of additional liability protection. Homeowners policies also provide no-fault medical coverage. In the event that someone is injured in a policyholder’s home, the injured person can simply submit medical bills to the policyholder’s insurance company. In this way expenses are paid without a liability claim being filed. This coverage, however, does not pay the medical bills for the policyholder’s own family or pets. 

4. Additional Living Expenses This pays the additional costs of living away from home if a house is inhabitable due to damage from a fire, storm or other insured disaster. It covers hotel bills, restaurant meals and other extra living expenses incurred while the home is being rebuilt. Coverage for additional living expenses differs from company to company. Many policies provide coverage for about 20 percent of the insurance on a house. The coverage can be increased for an additional premium. Some companies sell a policy that provides an unlimited amount of loss-of-use coverage, but for a limited amount of time. Additional living expense coverage also reimburses homeowners who rent out part of their home for the rent that would have been collected from a tenant if the home had not been destroyed. 

Types of Homeowners Insurance Policies There are several types of homeowners insurance policies that differ in the amount of insurance coverage they provide. The different types are fairly standard throughout the country. However, individual states and companies may offer policies that are slightly different or go by other names such as “standard” or “deluxe.” People who rent the homes they live in have specific renters policies. 

The various types of homeowners insurance policies are listed below. • HO-3: This is the most common policy and protects the home from all perils except those specifically excluded. • HO-1: Limited coverage policy This “bare bones” policy provides coverage against the first 10 disasters. It is no longer available in most states. • HO-2: Basic policy A basic policy provides protection against all 16 disasters. There is a version of HO-2 designed for mobile homes. • HO-8: Older home Designed for older homes, this policy usually reimburses for damage on an actual cash value basis, which means replacement cost less depreciation. Full replacement cost policies may not be available for some older homes. • HO4: Renter Created specifically for people who rent the home they live in, this policy protects personal possessions and any parts of the apartment that the policyholder owns, such as newly installed kitchen cabinets, against all 16 disasters. 

• H0-6: Condo/Co-op A policy for people who own a condo or co-op, it provides coverage for belongings and the structural parts of the building that they own. It protects against all 16 disasters. What Type of Disasters Are Covered? Most homeowners policies cover the 16 disasters listed below. Some “bare bones” policies only cover the first 10: • Fire or lightning • Windstorm or hail • Explosion • Riot or civil commotion • Damage caused by aircraft • Damage caused by vehicles 

• Smoke • Vandalism or malicious mischief • Theft • Volcanic eruption • Falling object • Weight of ice, snow or sleet • Accidental discharge or overflow of water or steam from within a plumbing, heating, air conditioning, or automatic fire-protective sprinkler system, or from a household appliance • Sudden and accidental tearing apart, cracking, burning, or bulging of a steam or hot water heating system, an air conditioning or automatic fireprotective system • Freezing of a plumbing, heating, air conditioning or automatic, fireprotective sprinkler system, or of a household appliance • Sudden and accidental damage from artificially generated electrical current (does not include loss to a tube, transistor or similar electronic component) 

Standard Homeowners Policy Exclusions Standard homeowners policies exclude coverage for flood, earthquake, war, nuclear accident, landslide, mudslide, sinkhole. Some of these exclusions are discussed below. 

Floods Flood damage is excluded under standard homeowners and renters insurance policies. Flood coverage, however, is available in the form of a separate policy both from the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and from a few private insurers. Additional information on flood insurance can be found on the FloodSmart.gov Web site or by calling 888-379-9531. For coverage over and above the $250,000 limit for property and $100,000 for contents provided by the NFIP, excess flood insurance is available from private insurance companies. (See Topic on Flood Insurance on page 47 for further information.) Tsunamis cause flood damage and are therefore only covered by a flood policy. 

Earthquakes Earthquake coverage can be a separate policy or an endorsement to a homeowners or renters policy. It is available from most insurance companies. In Insurance Basics Homeowners Insurance I.I.I. Insurance Handbook www.iii.org/insurancehandbook 9 California, it is also available from the California Earthquake Authority, a privately funded, publically managed organization. In earthquake prone states like California, the policy comes with a high deductible. 

Earthquakes Earthquake coverage can be a separate policy or an endorsement to a homeowners or renters policy. It is available from most insurance companies. In Insurance Basics Homeowners Insurance I.I.I. Insurance Handbook www.iii.org/insurancehandbook 9 California, it is also available from the California Earthquake Authority, a privately funded, publically managed organization. In earthquake prone states like California, the policy comes with a high deductible. 

Levels of Coverage There are three coverage options. 1. Actual Cash Value This type of coverage pays to replace the home or possessions minus a deduction for depreciation. 2. Replacement Cost This type of coverage pays the cost of rebuilding or repairing the home or replacing possessions without a deduction for depreciation. 3. Guaranteed/Extended Replacement Cost An extended replacement cost policy pays a certain percentage, generally 20-25 percent, over the coverage limit to rebuild the home in the event that materials and labor costs are pushed up by a widespread disaster, for example. For example, if homeowners take out a policy for $100,000, they can get up to an extra $20,000 or $25,000 of coverage. Some companies offer a guaranteed replacement cost policy, which pays whatever it costs to rebuild the home as it was before the fire or other disaster, even if it exceeds the policy limit. This gives protection against sudden increases in construction costs due to a shortage of building materials after a widespread disaster or other unexpected situations. It generally does not cover the cost of upgrading the house to comply with current building codes. However, an endorsement (or an addition to) the policy called Ordinance or Law can help pay for these additional costs. 

Guaranteed and extended replacement cost policies are more expensive; but can offer excellent financial protection against disasters. This type of coverage, however, may not be available in all states or from all companies. 

Business Insurance Basics Most businesses need to purchase at least the following four types of insurance: 1. Property Insurance Property insurance compensates a business if the property used in the business is lost or damaged as the result of various types of common perils, such as fire or theft. Property insurance covers not just a building or structure but also the contents, including office furnishings, inventory, raw materials, machinery, computers and other items vital to a business’s operations. Depending on the type of policy, property insurance may include coverage for equipment breakdown, removal of debris after a fire or other destructive event, some types of water damage and other losses. Business Interruption Insurance Also known as business income insurance, business interruption insurance is a type of property insurance. A business whose property has sustained a direct physical loss such as fire damage or a damaged roof due to a tree falling on it in a windstorm and has to close down completely while the premises are being repaired may lose out to competitors. A quick resumption of bus